

===== TECHNICAL REFERENCE: NASA_Power_System_Redundancy_Design_Trends_AllElectric.pdf =====

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
1
Power System Redundancy Design Trends for 
All-Electric eVTOL Quadrotors 
George L. Thomas1 and Brian P. Malone2 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135 
Electrical vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) vehicles promise to enable a variety of new 
local and intraregional air transport missions. However, there are significant challenges that 
must be solved to enable their use. One challenge is the relatively low reliability of power 
components (e.g. motors, power electronic devices, and batteries).  No clear development path 
to create reliable eVTOL power systems has been articulated in the literature, though it is 
generally assumed redundancy is part of the solution.  This work proposes an analysis process 
to examine the redundancy design space and select mass optimal designs for eVTOL power 
systems. The process is applied to a six passenger quadrotor vehicle, and results are used to 
highlight redundancy design trends for this class of vehicle. This process and associated data 
can help vehicle designers more effectively develop eVTOLs that meet reliability 
requirements. 
I.
Introduction
LECTRIC vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) vehicles are expected to enable a variety of new missions,
particularly local and intraregional air travel. A term for these missions is advanced air mobility (AAM) [1].
eVTOLs are especially promising for these missions because vertical takeoff capability enables operation in localized 
and urban spaces without access to runways, and propulsion system electrification enables design flexibility (e.g. 
distributed propulsion) that can increase vehicle efficiency, and facilitates use of low carbon or renewable power for 
flight. However, electrified propulsion is still largely an open research and development area, with significant 
investment from industry and government agencies worldwide. 
A key challenge to electrified propulsion for eVTOLs and most other classes of aircraft is the relatively low 
reliability of the necessary power components. Previous studies have identified electric machines, power electronics, 
and batteries as weak links for propulsion system reliability based on historical data [2]. There are several approaches 
to improve the reliability of these components. One is to run these devices at lower temperature or otherwise increase 
their operating temperature margin, because reduced operating temperatures are correlated with significantly longer 
lifespans of electrical power equipment [3]. This may be done by using higher temperature rated components (e.g. 
high temperature insulation materials, wide bandgap power electronics instead of silicon, etc), by reducing losses 
within the components, or through more aggressive thermal management, though the latter comes with costs in terms 
of mass and load power. Another is to reduce electrical stress on the devices, which may include adhering to power 
quality standards that bound these stresses [4], and increasing margin for electrical variables in the design, although 
additional margin may incur performance costs. 
Redundancy is another key approach towards increasing reliability and can be applied at the component or at the 
system level. Aircraft feature redundancy throughout, including in engine control systems [5] as well as fly-by-wire 
systems for vehicle control [6]. This work focuses on how redundancy can be used in the power system design in the 
all-electric NASA Revolutionary Vertical Lift Technology (RVLT) six passenger quadrotor concept vehicle (Quad6) 
to meet a representative reliability requirement. A rendering of this vehicle, first published in Ref. [7], is given in 
Figure 1. 
1 Electrical Engineer, Power Management and Distribution Branch, george.l.thomas@nasa.gov, AIAA Member. 
2 Electrical Engineer, Power Management and Distribution Branch, brian.p.malone@nasa.gov, AIAA Member. 
E 
AIAA SciTech Forum, National Harbor, MD
January 23-27, 2023

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
2
 
Figure 1: Rendering of the RVLT six passenger quad. 
 
It is expected that electrified propulsion power systems must feature some amount of redundancy. US patents and 
patent applications have been published describing possible power system redundancy designs, and describe many 
power system architecture considerations for multirotors, but these do not include analysis on the designs showing 
intent to meet reliability requirements, and they do not explore redundancy design space trends in detail [8, 9]. Little 
more has been published on this topic. This paper seeks to address this lack of published information by presenting a 
process to identify mass optimal redundancy designs that meet a given set of reliability requirements. This paper also 
applies this process to the RVLT Quad6 concept vehicle and includes a discussion of design trends and results. This 
methodology and data will help inform vehicle systems designers (especially in startups and those new to the field 
[10]) about redundancy design trends and practice, which will help them develop plans to meet relevant reliability 
requirements early on and avoid costly redesign cycles. 
Regarding reliability requirements, note that the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Advisory Circular 
(AC) 25.1309–1 and its revisions advise that catastrophic failure conditions must be extremely improbable (10–6 to 
10–9 or less depending on aircraft class) and that no single failure will result in a catastrophic failure condition, in order 
for an aircraft to comply with the Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) 25.1309 airworthiness standard [11]. From this, 
one can infer that all safety critical systems must be at least single fault tolerant. However, the FAA catastrophic 
failure probability requirement for eVTOLs has been ambiguous in the past due to the lack of definition and changing 
type classification for these vehicles [12]. On the other hand, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) 
SC-VTOL-01 requires a failure rate of 10–9 failures per flight hour for special condition certification of small VTOLs 
[13]. This work assumes requirements of single fault tolerance and a vehicle level catastrophic failure rate of 10–9 
failures per flight hour consistent with assumptions in previous studies [2]. Further, only catastrophic failures of power 
system components are considered. Power system reliability requirements are presented later in the text, based on the 
above assumptions. 
Section II describes the vehicle studied in this work. Section III covers the reliability analysis approach that was 
used in this work, with details on the associated reliability and mass models. Section IV discusses results and trends 
found in the study. Section V provides summary and conclusions. 
II. 
Vehicle Assumptions 
For this study, this vehicle is assumed to require 160 kW shaft power at each rotor. It is also assumed the power 
distribution architecture for the vehicle is a 1 kV DC radial system. The main bus is assumed to be battery backed and 
unregulated to avoid adding additional converters or regulators (and thus additional mass) between the battery and the 
main bus. All power for flight is sourced from Li-ion batteries, and the main bus power is delivered to the motors via 
inverters or variable speed motor drives which are fed by 5 meter cable runs. The baseline power system architecture 
(zero fault tolerant, with no redundant components) is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2: Power system for the all-electric six passenger quad. 
 
Performance and reliability technology assumptions for this vehicle are given in Table 1. 
 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
3
Table 1: Component technology assumptions. 
Variable 
Value 
Variable 
Value 
Minimum Required Rotor Hover Power (kW) 
160 
Battery Specific Energy (Wh/kg) 
400 
Mission Duration (h) 
1 
Battery Design Energy (kWh) 
275 
Pylon / Cable Length (m) 
5 
Nominal Battery Voltage (Vdc) 
1000 
Electric Machine Specific Power (kW/kg) 
13 
Nominal Battery Efficiency at Full Load 
0.94 
Electric Machine Efficiency 
0.96 
Electric Machine Failure Rate (failures/hr) 
10-6 
Power Electronics Specific Power (kW/kg) 
9 
Power Electronics Failure Rate (failures/hr) 
5·10-6 
Power Electronics Device Efficiency 
0.95 
Battery Failure Rate (failures/hr) 
3.45·10-6 
 
The efficiency, specific power, and specific energy technology values are based on assumptions about near-term 
future technology projected by the RVLT project [7]. The component failure rates are based on legacy constant failure 
rate (exponential distribution) models of the associated components and are assumed for this work to be accurate to 
within an order of magnitude [14, 15]. The authors expect these electric machine and power electronics failure rates 
may be conservative (i.e. overestimated), assuming proper engineering margin is built into the associated designs and 
quality parts are used, and so one may expect the system failure rates predicted in this work to be overestimated as 
well. The battery-backed main bus nominal voltage of 1000 V is chosen to be a conservative medium voltage value 
consistent with both RVLT hardware test capability goals and previous work [16]. Lastly, the propulsion system is 
assumed to be RPM controlled and does not feature cross shafting. It is assumed that the vehicle must maintain the 
full 160 kW rotor power capability at all four rotors and at all times in order to safely end a mission. Thus reliability 
in this paper is defined as the probability that all four rotors maintain a 160 kW power capability over the course of a 
full mission duration. 
III. 
Modeling and Analysis Approach 
This work uses the Electrical Power System – Sizing and Analysis Tool (EPS-SAT) to size the candidate system 
designs to the required load power, and estimate the associated system masses [17, 18]. New reliability engineering 
functions were added to EPS-SAT to enable calculating power system reliability and catastrophic failure rate based 
on the system architecture and assumed component failure rate data. In this work, the masses and failure rates of 
multiple power system design variants featuring different redundancy schemes are calculated. The redundancy design 
problem can be casted as an optimization problem in these two variables (system mass and failure rate), and a Pareto 
optimal (non-dominated) set of redundancy design solutions can be identified. Non-dominated design solutions are 
those that cannot be improved in any one objective function dimension without compromising at least one other 
dimension, and dominated design solutions are suboptimal ones that can be improved upon in multiple objective 
dimensions. The Pareto front represented by these solutions captures the tradeoff design trend between mass and 
reliability. Note that design solutions will be subject to one or more reliability constraints per regulations. The solution 
to be selected from the design space should be the lowest mass solution that meets the reliability constraints, because 
the lowest mass solution should enable a higher performing overall vehicle design. Figure 3 shows a visualization of 
the redundancy design space in mass and failure rate, showing dominated and non-dominated solutions, Pareto front, 
a reliability constraint, and the mass optimal feasible solution subject to the constraint. 
 
 
Figure 3: Redundancy design space for a hypothetical system. 
 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
4
In this work, a failure rate constraint of 10-10 catastrophic power system failures per flight hour was chosen, 
assuming this will support the EASA SC-VTOL-1 vehicle level failure rate of 10-9 failures per flight hour [2]. The 
remainder of this section discusses details of the reliability and mass models used in this work. 
A. Reliability Modeling 
In EPS-SAT, single (non-redundant) component reliabilities are calculated from the component failure rates using 
the exponential distribution definition 
𝑅= 𝑒−𝜆𝑇 
(1)
 
where R is the component reliability, λ is the component’s assumed constant failure rate, and T is a period of time of 
interest in flight hours. In our case, T is taken to be the maximum time duration of a given mission, which is assumed 
for this initial study to be 1 hour for this vehicle. Once component reliabilities are obtained, the system reliability and 
failure rates can be calculated as series and parallel combination of the component reliabilities and failure rates. For 
series combinations of components, the total failure rate is the sum of the component failure rates, and the total 
reliability is the product of the reliabilities. The reliability for k-out-of-n parallel redundant systems is given by the 
following function 
𝑅𝑘-out-of-𝑛(𝑅, 𝑘, 𝑛) = 1 −∑(𝑛
𝑚) (1 −𝑅)𝑛−𝑚𝑅𝑚
𝑘−1
𝑚=0
 
(2)
 
where n is the number of redundant parallel elements, k is the number of healthy elements required for mission success, 
and m is a summation index used in the expression [19]. Once the reliability of a redundant combination of elements 
is calculated, the failure rate of the redundant set of components is calculated by the inverse of Eqn. (1). 
 
𝜆= −ln(𝑅)
𝑇
 
(3)
 
The generalized redundancy architecture for the all-electric Quad6 power system is broken down into primary 
and secondary power systems and integrated into an end-to-end power system as illustrated in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4: Reliability block diagrams for a) the primary power system, b) the secondary power system, 
and c) the entire power system. 
 
The primary power system is composed of a number of parallel batteries as shown in Figure 4a. The reliability of 
the k1-out-of-n1 redundant primary power system can be calculated as 
 
𝑅𝑝𝑟𝑖= 𝑅𝑘-out-of-𝑛(𝑅𝑏, 𝑘1, 𝑛1) 
(4)
 
where k1 and n1 are the redundancy parameters for the primary system and Rb is the reliability of one battery. Second, 
each rotor is driven by a number of parallel motor/inverter strings, and each parallel set is referred to in this paper as 
a secondary power system, as shown in Figure 4b. Because each secondary string features a series inverter and motor, 
the secondary system reliability can then be calculated as 
 
𝑅𝑠𝑒𝑐= 𝑅𝑘-out-of-𝑛(𝑅𝑖𝑅𝑚, 𝑘2, 𝑛2) 
(5)
 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
5
where k2 and n2 are the redundancy parameters for the secondary system, and Ri and Rm are the reliabilities of one 
inverter and one motor. Note that the product of Ri and Rm is the reliability of a single one of the redundant secondary 
strings. 
The overall power system is composed of a primary system, and four secondary power systems which each drive 
one of the four rotors as shown in Figure 4c. It is assumed the power system must be capable of delivering the full 
160 kW shaft power at all times to all four rotors for the mission to be successful, meaning that none of the four 
secondary systems can fail for a successful mission. Given these assumptions, the full system reliability can then be 
written as 
 
𝑅𝑠𝑦𝑠= 𝑅𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑅𝑠𝑒𝑐
4 
(6)
 
The parallel inverters in Figure 4b may represent multiple separate inverters or may represent multiple inverter 
modules or cards that could be packaged in a single box. Likewise, multiple motors in Figure 4b may represent 
multiple separate motors, or multiple independent modular windings. The modular approach will likely be more mass 
efficient for both, and so may be preferred. 
Figure 4 shows all of the primary strings tied in parallel to a single main bus. In order for the reliability equations 
above to be valid in this case, it must be assumed that proper circuit protection is present and devices adhere to a 
power quality standard such that failures of one of the redundant primary strings will not affect any of the secondary 
strings and vice versa. This must be the case so that the failure rates of the redundant primary and secondary systems 
are independent from one another. In an alternative design, each primary string could power its own independent, 
isolated bus, and each secondary could then draw power equally from all of these isolated busses. This design approach 
should improve reliability in practice, however it may be challenging to design the inverters to accept power from 
each of the isolated primary busses. It is assumed for this work that a single bus is equivalent in terms of mass and 
failure rate to the alternative multiple iolated bus approach, so selection between these approaches is left for future 
work.All redundant components are assumed in this paper to “operate hot” and are nominally assumed to equally 
share load power. Architectures based on load sharing redundancy tend to have higher common cause failure rates 
than architectures that feature redundant backup systems that normally are not operational. This is because when a 
load sharing element goes offline, the remaining elements see an instantaneous increase in load, and higher loads are 
associated with higher component failure rates. Also, since these parallel load sharing components all see the same 
bus, any power quality phenomenon such as voltage surge will stress all redundant parts equally and such a 
phenomenon could be a common cause of potential failures. For this work, these common cause failures are accounted 
for using a beta factor model, with beta assumed to be 0.1. This value is reported to be a conservative beta factor 
assuming good engineering practice is followed [20]. Note that beta factor models are simplistic and a higher fidelity 
model of common cause failure rates could be adapted for future work. 
B. Mass Modeling 
Masses for single components in this study are calculated by dividing the component design power (a function of 
the rotor maximum load requirement) by the specific power assumed in Table 1. The mass of a k-out of-n redundant 
array of parallel components is calculated as expression 
 
𝑚𝑘-out-of-𝑛= 𝑛𝑓𝑚1-out-of-1 
(7)
 
where f is the fractional design power that each redundant component in the array is designed to. In this work, it is 
assumed f = 1 / k, which results in the minimum component power rating needed for k components in parallel to equal 
the design power. 
Note that this mass modeling approach is fairly simplistic. For one, it does not attempt to predict how the various 
subsystem masses within a given component will vary with redundancy design variables (e.g., structural, bearings, 
shaft, back iron, and windings for a motor). Attempts to account for this are difficult because the manner in which 
these masses vary depends greatly on how the component is designed, and electrified propulsion component designs 
themselves vary greatly. This model also neglects the fact that as the number of parallel redundant components 
increases, the amount of overhead mass should also increase (e.g., additional wiring harnesses for the additional 
redundant components, additional enclosures, etc). For instance, this model predicts 1-out-of-2 redundant systems to 
have the same mass as 2-out-of-4, which may not be true in reality—one would expect the 2-out-of-4 redundant system 
to have more overhead mass as it is a more complex system with a larger number of parts. The actual overhead mass 
for redundant systems should depend strongly on engineering and packaging decisions made in the design process and 
thus is hard to estimate. In addition, little data has been published on this overhead mass, complicating efforts to model 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
6
it. Ultimately, this simplified mass modeling approach was taken to avoid making too many assumptions about the 
design which could limit the general applicability of the work and overcomplicate the analysis effort. 
IV. 
Results and Discussion 
A study was conducted where the redundancy design variables for the primary (k1 and n1) and secondary (k2 and 
n2) systems were varied. Each component in a k-out-of-n redundant system is sized to a power level equal to 1 / k 
times the total power required for the whole set of redundant components. This means that k elements in parallel (the 
bare minimum for full capability operation) will be capable of up to the total required power. Realistic designs may 
size components to powers greater than 1/k, as this represents design margin which is often desired or required in real 
systems. 
In this study, n1 and n2 were varied from 0 to 4. For each value of n1, k1 was varied from 1 to n1 (and likewise 
with k2 and n2). This results in an exhaustive search over the redundancy design space for values of n1 and n2 up to 4. 
Given that this study is an exploration of a design space in four variables (n1, n2, k1, and k2), with two objective 
variables (system mass and failure rate), the data is not straightforward to analyze. The approach taken in this work is 
to draw multiple mass versus failure rate curves with the primary power system redundancy parameters held constant 
while the secondary system parameters are varied for the stated values of k2 and n2. Figure 5 provides an example by 
showing total power system mass (including battery, cables, motors, and inverters) versus the log of the system 
catastrophic failure rate for an architecture with a non-redundant primary power system (n1 = k1 = 1) and variable 
secondary power system redundancy designs (n2 and k2 varied). 
 
Figure 5: Mass versus failure rate trend as secondary system redundancy is varied, highlighting parts of 
design trend. 
 
Markers are drawn in Figure 5 for each design solution, and the redundancy design parameters associated with a 
particular solution are indicated in abbreviated text next to each marker. For example, “1oo1p” represents the non-
redundant primary system design analyzed in this figure. Likewise, “2oo3s” corresponds to a 2-out-of-3 redundant 
secondary—that is, three redundant strings or sets of components that are sized and operated such that only two of 
these is needed for full operation. It should be noted that none of the solutions in Figure 5 meet the reliability constraint, 
indicating some degree of redundancy is needed in the primary power system. 
Each of the curves for a given primary redundancy design in Figure 5 includes a region where the mass versus 
failure rate trend is flat or approximately zero slope (as shown in the blue circle), a region with finite negative slope 
(green circle), and a region with approximately infinite negative slope (red circle). The flat part of the design trend, in 
blue, is where the secondary system has a lower reliability than the primary and is the limiting factor for system 
reliability. In this case a higher redundancy allocation to the secondary will improve reliability without adding mass. 
The red, near infinite negative slope region is where the primary system reliability is significantly lower than the 
secondary system and dominates the trend. In this part of the trend, further improvements to system reliability require 
more redundancy allocation to the primary system, or alternatively, one can reduce secondary system redundancy to 
reduce mass without an impact on reliability. Finally, the finite slope region corresponds to where the primary and 
secondary system have reliabilities that are fairly close to each other. This region is where one is most likely to find a 
mass optimal overall design solution and corresponds to design solutions with well balanced redundancy allocation. 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
7
Figure 6 shows mass versus failure rate curves for multiple primary system redundancy designs. Each colored 
solid line plotted in the figure shows the mass versus failure rate trend for one primary system redundancy design 
while the secondary system redundancy design is varied. Primary system redundancy design values are indicated for 
each curve in the legend via abbreviated text (koon). The dotted black line shows the Pareto front connecting all non-
dominated design solutions, and the red dashed line shows the reliability constraint of 10-10 failures per flight hour. 
Note that some primary system designs (e.g. 2oo2 and 3oo3) are omitted from Figure 6 as they tend to be suboptimal. 
 
Figure 6: Mass versus failure rate trends for several primary power system redundancy designs as the 
secondary design is varied is varied. 
 
This data shows that to minimize mass, the primary system should be 3oo4 redundant. The data also shows that 
a 2oo3 redundant primary system has a comparable system failure rate while only being about 10% heavier and is a 
good alternative solution. The 1oo1 (non-redundant) solution weighs 784 kg, while the best case 2oo3 and 3oo4 
primary system designs weigh 1092 and 1206 kg respectively. This corresponds to a 39% increase in mass to meet 
reliability constraints versus the non-redundant solution. Note that a powertrain designer may want to select the 2oo3 
redundant primary design instead of a 3oo4, despite the additional mass, due to the fact that 2oo3 should result in a 
simpler, more conventional system.  Ultimately, both primary system design solutions should be considered further. 
While Figure 6 is useful for indicating overall trends and analysis of primary system redundancy, it does not 
indicate secondary system design solutions due to lack of space on the graphic. Figure 7 shows the mass versus failure 
rate data for the 2oo3 and 3oo4 primary systems and indicates both the primary and secondary system redundancy 
variables of each solution (e.g., 2oo3p/1oo4s on the graphic represents a 2oo3 redundant primary, and 1oo4 redundant 
secondary). 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
8
 
Figure 7: Mass versus failure rate for select redundancy design solutions closest to the reliability constraint. 
 
Figure 7 shows that the 2oo4 secondary system design is mass optimal for both the 2oo3 and 3oo4 primary system 
designs. Note that this secondary system design tends to sit at the bottom of the infinite slope region of each of these 
curves. This indicates that secondary system solutions more reliable than 2oo4 (i.e., 1oo3 and 1oo4) represent 
excessive, unnecessary redundancy allocated to the secondary system. 
This analysis was conducted again on a variant of the vehicle assumed to include cross shafting and collective 
control instead of RPM control without cross shafting. Mass of the gearbox, cross shafting, and collective mechanisms 
are neglected in this study for simplicity however these are not insignificant in general. This analysis was conducted 
to see how different the trend is for these two different propulsion system concepts, given that there is an ongoing 
debate about the drawbacks and benefits for each in the literature, with no clear winner identified in general. With 
cross shafting, the propulsion system no longer needs the full 160 kW of motor capability active at each rotor station. 
Instead, it is assumed it only needs 160 kW total per rotor, no matter where it is generated. This is because the cross 
shafting allows rotors to be driven with mechanical power generated at other rotor stations. This means that instead 
of Eqn (4), the total secondary reliability is given by 
 
𝑅sec⁡(cross) = 𝑅𝑘-out-of-𝑛(𝑅𝑖𝑅𝑚, 4𝑘2, 4𝑛2) 
(8)
 
and instead of Eqn (5), the system reliability is given by 
 
𝑅𝑠𝑦𝑠(𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠) = 𝑅𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑅sec⁡(𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠) 
(9)
 
Figure 8 illustrates why this is the case by looking at the full collection of secondary strings at all four rotors, 
assuming a 1oo2 redundant secondary system. For the non cross shafting system on the left of Figure 8 it can be seen 
that one of the two secondary strings at the front left rotor may fail and the remaining one will be able to provide full 
power to that rotor (noting that 1oo2 means each secondary string is sized to the full rotor load of 160 kW). However, 
without cross shafting, if both fail, the success criteria will not be met, and the result is a catastrophic system failure. 
On the other hand, the cross shafting system shown on the right of Figure 8 represents one large redundant collection 
of secondary strings distributed across the vehicle, instead of four smaller ones. In this system, losing all motoring 
capability at one location is not significantly worse than losing the same amount of capability distributed across 
multiple locations. 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
9
 
Figure 8: Block diagram showing shaft connections (double parallel lines) between motors for the non cross-
shaft quadrotor powertrain concept (left) and for the cross-shaft powertrain (right). 
 
In order to capture the reliability differences between these variant powertrains, Figure 9 shows the trend for 2oo3 
primary system designs comparing the baseline non-cross shafted concept with the cross shafted one. The data shows 
that the collection of secondary systems in the cross shafting concept is at least as reliable as the non-cross shafting 
version, and in multiple cases is more reliable. 
 
 
Figure 9: Mass versus failure rate trend comparing baseline concept and concept with cross shafting, shown 
both over a significant portion of the design space (left) and zoomed in on the constraint (right). 
 
The power system masses (neglecting gearing and shafting) for the baseline and cross shafting concepts are the 
same, however the trend is slightly more favorable for the cross shafting concept due to the fact that its secondary 
system generally has lower failure rate than the baseline for the same designs values (n1, n2, k1, and k2). Figure 9 shows 
that the cross shafting concept benefits from a lower secondary system redundancy allocation compared to the 
baseline, indicating that it needs less redundancy. For instance, the cross shafting concept is in its infinite slope region 
for the 2003p/2oo3s redundancy design (indicating the level of secondary redundancy is excessive), whereas for the 
baseline, the 2003p/2oo3s  design is still within the finite slope region (indicating this level of redundancy is a good 
allocation).  
The optimum power system mass for the cross shafting concept is 1153 kg vs 1206 kg for the baseline, resulting 
in a 4% decrease. This may not be a significant enough decrease in mass to warrant the additional complexity of the 
cross shafting especially since cross shafting will add weight that may offset the redundancy trend benefit. However 
other considerations for the drivetrain should ultimately be taken into account including the handling and ride qualities 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
10 
of the two concepts. Mainly, there are concerns that RPM control of vehicles with large rotors may be difficult or 
impossible because the large rotor inertias make it challenging to meet maneuverability requirements. 
V. 
Conclusions 
This paper shows an electrified propulsion power system redundancy design analysis process and applies it to the 
RVLT all-electric six passenger quadrotor. The process can help conceptual design and analysis teams select power 
system redundancy architectures by identifying mass optimal designs and highlighting design trends. The 
implementation of this method in the EPS-SAT tool will help NASA conduct future mass-redundancy tradeoff studies 
in a single integrated tool, enabling it to develop conceptual power system designs with appropriate levels of 
redundancy and more accurately estimate associated masses needed for that redundancy. The data from this work 
shows that for the six passenger quadrotor, 3oo4 and 2oo3 are optimal primary power system redundancy designs 
(i.e., the batteries that make up the main bus). Likewise, 2oo4 is the mass optimal redundancy design for the secondary 
power system (i.e., the inverters and motors that drive the rotors). This study shows that the required level of 
redundancy to meet reliability constraints results in 39-54% additional power system mass compared to a non-
redundant (1oo1) system. A powertrain with cross shafting was also shown to be more reliable, however the overall 
benefit in terms of optimal power system mass (4% or less) may not be enough to recommend cross shafting over 
individual RPM controlled rotors. Note that fidelity may be added to the mass and reliability models in future work. 
Also note that maintainability was ignored in this study and can be addressed in future work. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge the Revolutionary Vertical Lift Technology (RVLT) project under the 
Aerospace Research Mission Directorate (ARMD) that has supported this work. 
 
 
References 
  
[1] “Advanced Air Mobility National Campaign Overview,” NASA [website],  
URL: https://www.nasa.gov/aeroresearch/aam/description/ [retrieved 21May2022]. 
[2] Darmstadt, P., et. al., “Hazards Analysis and Failure Modes and Effects Criticality Analysis (FMECA) of Four Concept 
Vehicle Propulsion Systems,” The Boeing Company, NASA CR-2019-220217, June 2019. 
[3]  Lakshminarayanan, V. and Sriraam, N., “The Effect of Temperature on the Reliability of Electronic Components”, 2014 IEEE 
International Conference on Electronics, Computing and Communication Technologies (IEEE CONECCT), Bangalore, India; 
February 2014 
[4] Ae-10 High Voltage Committee, “Aircraft High Voltage DC Power Quality Standard [Work in Progress]” SAE Aerospace 
Standard AS7499, 2019 
[5] Kniat, J. and Bluish, J., "An Application of Redundancy in Digital Electronic Engine Control," SAE Technical Paper 801200, 
1980 
[6] Bumby, E., “Redundancy Management for Fly-by-Wire Systems,” AIAA Guidance and Control Conference, August 1972. 
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1972-884 
[7] Silva, C., Johnson, W., Solis, E., and Patterson, M., “VTOL Urban Air Mobility Concept Vehicles for Technology 
Development,” AIAA Aviation Forum, Atlanta, GA, June 25-29, 2018. 
[8] Bevirt, J., Stoll, A., van der Geest, M., MacAfee, S., Ryan, J., “Electric Power System Architecture and Fault Tolerant VTOL 
Aircraft Using Same” U.S. Patent Application No. US20200010187A1, 2020. 
[9] Melack, J., “Systems And Methods For Power Distribution In Electric Aircraft” U.S. Patent No. US11465764 B2, 2022. 
[10] “eVTOL Aircraft Directory,” Vertical Flight Society [website], URL: https://evtol.news/aircraft [retrieved 24May2022]. 
[11] US Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Advisory Circular 25.1309-1A - System Design and Analysis,” 1988 URL: 
https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars/index.cfm/go/document.information/documentid/22680 
[retrieved 11November2022] 
[12] Brinkmann, P., “AAM companies press FAA to clarify pathway for powered-lift certification” Aerospace America, 
September 23, 2022. URL: https://aerospaceamerica.aiaa.org/aam-companies-press-faa-to-clarify-pathway-for-powered-lift-
certification/ [retrieved 11November2022]. 
[13] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “Special Condition for Small-Category VTOL Aircraft” EASA 
Special Condition, SC-VTOL-01, 2019 URL: https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/dfu/SC-VTOL-01.pdf [retrieved 
11November2022] 
[14] Lalli, V., et al., “Reliability and Maintainability (RAM) Training,” NASA/TP-2000-207428, July 2000. 
[15] Tang, Q., Shu, X., Zhu, G., Wang, J., and Yang, H., “Reliability Study of BEV Powertrain System and Its Components – A 
Case Study,” Processes 2021, 9(5), 762.  https://doi.org/10.3390/pr9050762  
 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
11 
 
[16] Thomas, G., Chapman, J., Alencar, J., Hasseeb, H., Sadey, D., and Csank, J., “Multidisciplinary systems analysis of a six 
passenger quadrotor Urban Air Mobility vehicle powertrain,”. AIAA Propulsion and Energy Forum. August 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2020-3564 
[17] Hanlon,  P., Thomas, G., Csank, J., and Sadey, D., "A Tool for Modeling and Analysis of Electrified Aircraft Power Systems," 
2019 AIAA/IEEE Electric Aircraft Technologies Symposium (EATS), 2019, pp. 1-16, doi: 10.2514/6.2019-4403. 
[18] “Electrical Power System - Sizing and Analysis Tool (EPS-SAT) (LEW-20017-1),” NASA Software Catalog [website], URL: 
https://software.nasa.gov/software/LEW-20017-1 [retrieved 24May2022].  
[19] Nakashima, K., Matznaga, H., Ueda, Y., Yamato, K., “Optimal Design of Redundant Systems for Improving Fail-Safe 
Characteristics” Computers and Mathematics with Applications, Vol. 24, No. 1/2, pp. 109-117, 1992. 
[20] Jones, H., “Common Cause Failures and Ultra Reliability,” 42nd International Conference on Environmental Systems, 15 July 
2012 - 19 July 2012, San Diego, California, https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2012-3602 


===== TECHNICAL REFERENCE: NASA_X-57_Power_and_Command_System_Design.pdf =====

X-57 Power and Command System Design 
Sean Clarke, P.E., Matthew Redifer, 
Kurt Papathakis, and Aamod Samuel 
NASA Armstrong Flight Research Center 
Edwards, California, USA 
Sean.Clarke@nasa.gov 
Trevor Foster 
Empirical Systems Aerospace, Inc. 
San Luis Obispo, California, USA 
Trevor.Foster@ESAero.com
 
Abstract—This paper describes the power and command 
system architecture of the X-57 Maxwell flight demonstrator 
aircraft. The X-57 is an experimental aircraft designed to 
demonstrate radically improved aircraft efficiency with a 3.5 
times aero-propulsive efficiency gain at a “high-speed cruise” 
flight condition for comparable general aviation aircraft. These 
gains are enabled by integrating the design of a new, optimized 
wing and a new electric propulsion system. As a result, the X-57 
vehicle takes advantage of the new capabilities afforded by electric 
motors as primary propulsors. Integrating new technologies into 
critical systems in experimental aircraft poses unique challenges 
that require careful design considerations across the entire vehicle 
system, such as qualification of new propulsors (motors, in the case 
of the X-57 aircraft), compatibility of existing systems with a new 
electric power distribution bus, and instrumentation and 
monitoring of newly qualified propulsion system devices. 
Keywords—aircraft propulsion and power, electric propulsion, 
experimental aircraft, failure modes and effects analysis, x-plane 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) Scalable Convergent Electric Propulsion and 
Operations Research (SCEPTOR) project is demonstrating 
radically improved aircraft efficiencies with the X-57 Maxwell 
flight demonstrator aircraft. In order to achieve the 3.5 times 
aero-propulsive efficiencies, a Tecnam P2006T (Costruzioni 
Aeronautiche Tecnam S.r.l., Capua, Italy) airframe was chosen 
as the baseline aircraft. The aircraft will be retrofitted with a high 
aspect-ratio wing, the internal combustion engines will be 
replaced with electric motors and relocated to the wingtips, an 
array of smaller electric motors and propellers will be integrated 
into the leading edge of the wing, and the fuel tanks will replace 
with batteries (see Fig. 1). The X-57 flight demonstrator aircraft 
was designed using propulsion airframe integration (PAI) 
techniques that have long interested aircraft designers but were 
heretofore impractical due to the limitations of more traditional 
propulsion systems. For example, turbine and piston engines 
designed for the small scales required for these PAI 
opportunities cannot achieve specific power and efficiency as 
high as can larger systems. This condition reduces the gains 
achieved from PAI when using traditional, hydrocarbon-based 
powertrains. Improvements in the performance of electric 
propulsion powertrains make these PAI techniques practical, 
enabling an overall improvement of aircraft energy usage and, 
therefore, operating costs. 
Integrated design for effective interaction between the wing 
and the propellers is the core demonstration effort on the X-57 
flight 
demonstrator 
aircraft; 
recent 
advancements 
in 
high-performance electric motors, motor controllers, and battery 
management technologies enable this new design paradigm. The 
X-57 will be the first electrified X-plane and because of the 
electric powertrain that is central to the capability being 
demonstrated here, the aircraft has been designated Maxwell in 
honor of James Clerk Maxwell’s foundational work describing 
the nature of the electromagnetic forces that are harnessed in the 
electric motors, motor inverters, power buses and batteries that 
comprise the X-57 traction system. 
II. SCOPE 
This paper describes the design of the X-57 avionics power, 
traction power, and command systems for optimized system 
reliability given the constraints of a flight research program 
showcasing experimental hardware in critical systems. The 
system architecture relies on redundancy throughout the design 
to limit the scope of failures, component testing to limit the 
likelihood of failures, and failure analysis and training to limit 
the persistence of failures. Design decisions throughout the 
development of the X-57 traction system have been based on 
these principles and may serve as a case study for development 
of future experimental aircraft and potential commercial aircraft 
exhibiting these technologies. Power and command system 
redundancy is a key feature for limiting the impact of faults 
along the command and data handling pathways, the traction 
power buses, the energy storage medium, and the main vehicle 
motors. Evaluation of each developmental component by way of 
component independent design review, endurance testing, and 
function validation in the integrated system are essential to 
ensuring reliability. The integrated X-57 system design will be 
evaluated for failure modes and will be integrated into an aircraft 
simulator with a flight-like cockpit that will be used for pilot 
training, ensuring rapid response to the most severe fault cases. 
 
Fig. 1. X-57 Isometric model with centerline cut, showing battery system,
high aspect ratio wing, electric motors, and traction power bus. 

III. SYSTEM DESIGN OVERVIEW 
Development of the X-57 research systems has been staged 
into four configurations (Mods I-IV), each of which increases in 
complexity over the course of the research program. This 
approach enables researchers to evaluate the baseline 
performance and handling qualities of the unmodified aircraft in 
Mod I, the experimental propulsion system dynamics and 
reliability in Mod II, the high-performance, high aspect-ratio 
wing in Mod III, and the distributed electric propulsion system 
in Mod IV. By deploying the traction power, avionics power, 
and command systems in Mod II, the integrated system 
performance of these systems can be studied in a flight-proven 
airframe configuration with ample rudder authority and flexible 
center of gravity (CG) placement. Thus, by the time the PAI 
features are being evaluated in Mod III and Mod IV, the 
electrical systems will be well understood and reliable as a result 
of the extensive experience gained operating the traction power, 
avionics power, and command systems during the Mod II 
ground- and flight-testing program. 
The X-57 traction system beginning in Mod II consists of 
two independent battery packs, redundant power distribution 
buses, and two cruise motors. Each cruise motor is rated for 255 
Nm and up to 2700 rpm (72 kW), shown in Fig. 2, and powered 
by two independent motor torque controllers which convert the 
DC power provided by the batteries to switched AC power based 
on the torque commanded by the pilot. Details of the cruise 
motor design and development process are described in [1] and 
[2]. The battery packs are a custom design that uses commercial 
off-the-shelf (COTS) lithium-ion 18650 cells arranged into four 
large (approximately 100 lb.) modules per pack. Each of the two 
battery packs supply approximately 23 kWh of usable capacity 
and operate independently from each other. In the event of a 
failure in one of the redundant systems, either pack can each 
provide sufficient power for a controlled return to base. 
Redundancy throughout the design of the traction power, 
avionics power, and command system is a critical tool for 
ensuring minimum required thrust is available in the event of 
any single fault condition on this experimental flight 
demonstrator. Fig. 3 shows how the traction power system 
redundancy approach has been used to design for two 
independent vehicle batteries, traction buses, and motor torque 
controllers for the main cruise motors. This approach is critical 
for the X-57 design because the cruise power system is located 
at the wingtips in order to achieve improved propulsive 
efficiency. Nominally, this wingtip configuration provides much 
improved performance of the main propellers, but this 
configuration also increases the complexity of designing for the 
single-motor-out failure case because a failure of one of the 
cruise motors or propellers introduces a large yaw moment due 
to asymmetric thrust. The redundancy approach of each of the 
systems described in this paper limits the majority of those 
failure cases to compromising less than 50 percent of the 
available thrust at either cruise motor. Similarly, for the Mod IV 
Distributed Electric Propulsion (DEP) system driving 12 
propellers along the leading edge of the wing (six on each side) 
to achieve high lift at low airspeeds, a redundant architecture is 
critical to reducing the severity of single-failure modes. 
Asymmetry in the induced velocity of air across the left wing 
versus the right wing can cause roll or yaw of the aircraft and a 
resultant loss of lift. The redundancy approach limits the effects 
of these failures to primarily avoid asymmetric upsets, and 
secondarily to limit the magnitude of the failure to no more than 
three of the propulsors for most cases (because no more than 
three of the motors in the DEP system on each side of the wing 
share a bus). 
The traction and command systems developed for the X-57 
aircraft are intentionally kept as simple as possible to minimize 
the development risks associated with complex systems and to 
simplify testing and integration. Most of the components are 
COTS products or are slightly modified from COTS products. 
Although the goal is to use parts that are of high technology 
readiness level (TRL) and already available in the marketplace, 
some such items are not suitable because of the demanding 
performance requirements for the X-57 or because of specific 
application needs. The cruise motors and torque controllers are 
being developed for this vehicle by Joby Aviation (Santa Cruz, 
California).  The main vehicle battery system is being developed 
by Electric Power Systems Inc. (Industry, California). The X-57 
acceptance and qualification test plan is designed to screen each 
component with a level of investigation appropriate to 
identifying manufacturing defects and design flaws before 
integration into the X-57. 
Fig. 2. The X-57 Cruise Motor prototype and variable-pitch propeller before a
test run. Photograph credit Joby Aviation. 
Fig. 3. X-57 Redundant Traction Power System. 

IV. AVIONICS POWER SYSTEM 
The X-57 avionics power system is designed to provide a 
piloting experience similar to that of the Tecnam P2006T, the 
aircraft from which the X-57 flight demonstrator is derived. The 
approach to the design involves maintaining as many of the 
existing avionics systems as possible, allowing, to the extent 
safely possible, the use of established procedures identified in 
the relevant Pilot Operating Handbook. The stock configuration 
follows the approach of many twin engine aircraft by cross-
strapping the engine generator buses to a main bus which is 
backed up by a battery. This method allows the operation of 
esential aircraft avionics systems such as instruments, landing 
gear, and flaps in the event of many types of system power loss. 
The avionics power buses can be powered from either the left or 
right generator buses, or the battery backup. Loads can be shed 
by opening the cross-strap switches or the left and right avionics 
buses, affording the pilot many options in the event of various 
avionics power system failures. 
The X-57 flight demonstrator follows the same approach, 
maintaining many of the existing switches, wiring, circuit 
breakers, and relays of the Tecnam P2006T. As shown in the X-
57 avionics power system interconnect (Fig. 4), the left and right 
generator buses are fed by the aircraft traction battery system. 
The traction battery consists of two battery packs (A and B). 
Because the battery packs have a nominal voltage of 461 VDC, 
the traction battery system implements two DC/DC buck 
converters (one for each battery pack) to generate 14 VDC 
avionics power which feeds the left and right generator buses 
from the A and B batteries, respectively. Each buck converter is 
sized for the entire avionics bus load. The stock aircraft backup 
battery remains connected to the essential bus to provide 
essential avionics power in the event of a traction battery failure 
or shutdown. Avionics power can also be supplied from the 
aircraft external power socket for ground-testing operations. 
Notable differences between the Tecnam P2006T and the 
X-57 flight demonstrator are the instrumentation bus and the 
new wing avionics buses. The instrumentation bus is fed from 
the aircraft right generator bus by way of a DC/DC boost 
converter in order to generate 28 VDC used for instrumentation. 
The wing avionics buses A and B are added to facilitate the 
redundancy in the cruise motors. The dual core windings in the 
cruise motor are nominally powered by two separate cruise 
motor controllers. Each wing avionics bus provides power to the 
cruise controllers in the left or right wing. Each motor controller 
in the left and right wings is fed by the A and B battery pack 
separately via the wing avionics buses, allowing shutdown or 
failure of either individual battery or wing avionics bus with 
continued operation of the motor at reduced power with one 
remaining controller. 
To effectively communicate warnings to the pilot about 
faults in the new avionics power and traction power systems, the 
Tecnam P2006T annunciator panel was customized. The new 
annunciator panel configuration, is shown in Fig. 5. The A and 
B avionics warning lights are triggered by a fault indication from 
the DC/DC buck converters in the traction battery system. A 
typical response to this warning would be to shut down the 
avionics side with the fault, and continue operations on the 
opposite side. A low-voltage indication from either of the main 
traction battery sides is considered a critical fault. Depending on 
other factors, the response may be the shutdown of the offending 
battery side and immediate return to base with reduced motor 
performance. These annunciator panel warnings are in addition 
to other warnings that are part of the command bus system, 
including fault notification via the multi-function display and 
audio alarms. 
V. TRACTION POWER SYSTEM 
The X-57 traction power system is designed to safely and 
reliably provide power to the motor torque controllers and 
ensure that enough power would remain available to safely land 
the aircraft in the event of single-point failures. This is achieved 
by using redundant power buses, physical separation of cabling 
and conduits, and electronically controlled power contactors for 
safe operation of the motor controllers. 
While definitive guidelines exist for designing a safe and 
reliable traction power system, certified, airworthy electric 
aircraft propulsion systems for manned flight are a relatively 
new design space. There is little precedent or documentation to 
define proper standards. Existing Federal Aviation Regulations 
(FARs), such as Part 23 and Part 25, or Aeronautical Radio, 
Incorporated (ARINC) 400 series standards provide only basic 
wiring standards and limited guidance can be inferred from 
turbine or gas engine regulations. Designing the X-57 traction 
power system necessitated evaluating the system as a whole to 
implement standard aircraft features and capabilities. Once a 
functional system was developed, the available standards were 
combined with best practices to implement each subsystem. 
One such subsystem is the traction power cabling which 
includes standard aircraft features such as redundancy and 
isolation. The Mod II/III traction power bus for the X-57 is 
Fig. 4. The X-57 avionics power system interconnect. 
Fig. 5. The X-57 annunciator panel with electric propulsion system indication.

divided into two independent A and B buses that are each 
subdivided between the left (A/L and B/L) and right (A/R and 
B/R) side of the aircraft, as shown in Fig. 3.  Each bus (A and 
B) is independently powered by an electrically-isolated battery. 
This architecture provides redundancy to the cruise motors in 
the event one of the buses fails. The buses are additionally 
isolated from each other, within the wing, each bus running 
inside dedicated conduits. This isolation aids in preventing 
cascading bus failures. Driving each cruise motor are two motor 
torque controllers, commonly referred to as the cruise motor 
controller (CMC). Each bus feeds one of the CMCs for one 
cruise motor. This technique follows the same redundant design 
philosophy that given any single-point failure, each cruise motor 
can still operate under the command of a single CMC.  
Contactor pallets are installed in the traction bus cabling 
between the batteries and the motors. There are two contactor 
pallets (A and B) located in the fuselage of the aircraft 
corresponding to the associated A or B bus.  Each pallet contains 
sensors and electrical components to complete or interrupt the 
circuit to the motor controllers. To safely power on the CMCs 
and avoid inadvertently energizing the traction bus in the wing, 
custom pre-chargers with integrated, aircraft-grade contactors 
are used on the pallets. The pre-chargers control the voltage in 
the traction bus to restrict the inrush current and the contactors 
allow remote switching of the power from the traction bus. 
Current and voltage sensors within each pallet are used to 
measure the total energy consumption rate and total energy 
consumed. Isolation of the A and B buses is maintained with two 
contactor pallets physically placed on separate sides of the 
aircraft. This arrangement prevents failure of components within 
one pallet from cascading to the other pallet.  
The wire used for the X-57 traction bus cable is unique in 
that it is custom designed to address several challenges. 
Minimizing weight is inherently important, so using small-
gauge wire is necessary. Wire that is too small, however, is a 
safety concern because of the potential for wires to overheat. 
Each electric cruise motor is designed to run at a total power of 
60 kW with each CMC nominally drawing 30 kW. The design 
of the X-57 batteries calls for lithium-ion cells in a series/parallel 
configuration combined with a depth-of-discharge limitation 
that drives the voltage range between 416 VDC and 525 VDC. 
To size the traction cable, we assume that each bus (A/L, A/R, 
B/L, B/R) must carry 30 kW, which results in a current ranging 
from 57 A to 72 A for each bus. Derating factors for altitude and 
number of conductors in a bundle are determined using [3] 
which relates wire size (in American wire gauge, AWG) to the 
expected temperature rise. The X-57 design uses four flat 
10-AWG conductors that are equivalent to 4-AWG as shown in 
Fig. 6. These current limits only allow 4-AWG if the cable is 
able to reject heat to ambient air. If the air temperature is allowed 
to rise due to high-current operation of the wire, the 4-AWG 
wire may fail. In this design example, aerospace standards do 
exist, however, those standards fail to take into account 
considerations from a systems perspective. This standard 
provides a good first approximation, but model-driven 
engineering (MDE) can refine the design further. Initial 
application of the SAE standard estimated that 2-AWG would 
be required for nominal operation. Additionally, it is possible to 
over-drive the CMC in response to some system failures, which 
would require pulling more than the nominal design current 
through a single bus. In this case, the SAE standard estimates 
that 2-AWG is required. Taking the MDE approach, a 
specialized 4-AWG cable with a high-temperature jacket was 
selected. The traction bus conduits are fabricated from a 
thermally-conductive composite material and are thermally 
isolated from the wing structure. In practice, the time spent 
operating at elevated temperatures will be monitored and limited 
as needed to prevent damage to the traction bus. Tests on the 
traction bus cable with X-57 flight profiles are being conducted 
using the NASA Electric Aircraft Testbed (NEAT) at the NASA 
Glenn Research Center (Cleveland, Ohio) in order to better 
quantify the performance of the cable. 
Radiated electromagnetic interference (EMI) from the 
traction bus is an additional design challenge, and can interfere 
with other systems on the vehicle. The traction system may 
exhibit high frequency interference due to inverter switching 
events or lower frequency noise related to motor field rotation. 
To mitigate this, several traditional shielding methods were 
considered, but the custom wing in the Mod III configuration 
has very limited space, so it was not possible to use shielded #4 
AWG wires for the traction bus. However, the custom cable 
described in Fig. 6 meets the space requirements. This cable 
comprises four adjacent 10-AWG wires, creating a flat cable 
that is four times wider than it is tall. The manufacturer claims 
that this configuration reduces the inductance and radiated noise 
as compared to an equivalent round wire, and modeling of these 
cable configurations supports this claim, as presented in Fig. 7. 
To test this performance, the NEAT facility conducted 
qualitative testing to assess radiated emissions on candidate 
 
Fig. 6. The X-57 annunciator panel with electric propulsion system indication.
Fig. 7. Near-field electric and magnetic field strength comparison between 
traditional two-conductor cable and the X-57 “flat cable” configuration. 

cabling for the X-57 flight demonstrator. The NEAT test setup 
has a 125-kW motor-inverter and DO-160 line impedance 
stabilization network equipped for radio frequency emission 
measurement. Testing indicated that there was no significant 
difference in radiated emissions between the baseline shielded 
cable and the unshielded cables described in Table I; however, 
emissions are sensitive to the specific equipment being tested. 
The flat cable was selected because that cable fit the geometry 
restrictions in the Mod III wing without noticeable EMI 
concessions. There may be a benefit given the ability to tightly 
stack the supply and return cables to cancel radiated fields. 
VI. COMMAND SYSTEM 
A. Overview 
The X-57 command bus is used to control the electric motors 
and provides aircraft health and status. The command flow 
consists of throttle encoders (TEs) which digitize the existing 
Tecnam throttle lever positions and the electric motor 
controllers, which use this position as a torque target. The 
architecture of the bus follows the Controller Area Network 
(CAN) standard and includes both standard CAN messages and 
the higher-level CANopen protocol. The CAN protocol offers 
various benefits including error detection, message arbitration, 
multicast reception, and prioritization [4]. The single-wire pair 
required for the CAN physical layer and a lack of a bus 
controller simplify implementation. All devices on the X-57 
command bus adhere to the CAN2.0A standard and operate at 
1,000 kbaud. The CANopen system is a higher layer protocol, 
allowing configuration of nodes and defining the internal device 
structure of each device on the network [5]. Since CANopen is 
a higher layer of protocol built on CAN, components using the 
CANopen protocol can interoperate on a bus with components 
that communicate with standard CAN messaging. 
The components of the command bus were selected based 
on robustness and compatibility with the CAN bus. Because 
some components use the CANopen standard, precautions were 
taken to ensure the components using the standard CAN 
protocol do not interfere with the additional functionality of the 
CANopen devices. The CANopen protocol uses a portion of the 
message identification (first 4 bits of the message ID) of the 
CAN structure to identify configuration parameters and data 
parameters. By considering the data parameter identifiers used 
by CANopen, and carefully selecting the device identifications 
both for the CANopen and standard CAN devices, message 
collisions between the two standards is prevented. A diagram of 
the command system network is shown in Fig. 8. 
B. Components 
The battery management system (BMS) is a custom solution 
built by Electric Power Systems (EPS). It uses a CANopen 
standard that has been customized to fit with the X-57 CAN 
architecture. The BMS provides battery health and status 
information to the CAN bus, which can help convey relevant 
information to the pilot. 
The CMC is a custom solution provided by Joby Motors 
(Santa Cruz, California) and uses a CAN interface. The motor 
controller communicates health and status information for itself 
and the motor, including torque, speed, and temperatures, that 
can be used to provide situational awareness to the pilot. 
The MoTeC synchronous versatile input module (SVIM) is 
an analog to digital converter that transmits the data on a CAN 
bus. These modules collect data at high rates (5000 samples per 
second) and high resolution (15-bit) synchronously with other 
modules as needed. For the X-57 application, these modules are 
used to record the blade pitch angle and temperatures associated 
with the CMCs and the motors. The size and capability to 
transmit on CAN make these devices useful in an EMI 
environment research capacity. 
The MoTeC Pty Ltd (Melbourne, Australia) D175 is a 
full-color, customizable display and is the main interface 
between the pilot and the command bus. Fig. 9 shows s sample 
screen of the display. These screens show health and status 
information from the BMS, CMC, and TEs while also showing 
warnings and alarms based on the values from these systems. 
The screens are toggled with switch inputs incorporated into the 
display. Along with the situational awareness provided by this 
TABLE I.  
NEAT FACILITY EMI CABLE TEST MATRIX 
Cable 
Manufacturer 
Part number 
Configuration 
1 
Champlain 
EXRAD-XLX2X 
Round/Shield 
2 
TE Connectivity 
WMSHF260-0113-2-9 
Round/Unshield 
3 
Methode 
CD-0322-1B 
Flat/Unshield 
 
Fig. 8. The X-57 command system network diagram. 
 
Fig. 9. The X-57 cockpit display reflects the duality of the X-57 system
design. Indicators include State of Charge, discharge rate, and throttle position. 

display, the screens provide additional information that aid in 
troubleshooting on the ground and quickly diagnosing problems 
in the air. The two main pages for the pilot are toggled using a 
simple switch, while the remaining pages are accessed by 
combining the switch with an eight-position rotary switch. This 
setup allows 16 different pages with information about the 
health and status of various X-57 components. 
A MoTeC advanced central logger (ACL) works as the 
processor for the display. The logger collects all of the relevant 
signals, performs mathematical operations on them, and feeds 
the results to the display. As such, the logger is used to determine 
the health and status of the battery and motors and to provide 
any alarms or warnings to the pilot by way of the display. The 
ACL also controls the light-emitting diode (LED) lights on the 
D175 display that provide quick information to the pilot, such as 
battery state-of-charge (SOC) or emergency location. Finally, 
the ACL serves as the interpreter for the SVIMs. The SVIM 
transmits data on the CAN bus in a proprietary format that is not 
easily interpreted by the instrumentation stack. Therefore, data 
that come from the SVIM are read by the ACL and then 
retransmitted to the command bus for the instrumentation stack 
to record. Since the instrumentation stack time-tags all the data 
being recorded, there is an inherent delay between the time when 
the SVIM transmits the data and the instrumentation stack 
records the data after ACL retransmission. This delay is 
acceptable because of the slow rate of change of the data being 
collected by the SVIM. 
The two throttle encoders used in the project are Baumer Ltd. 
(Southington, Connecticut) rotary encoders that are CANopen 
compliant. These devices measure rotation of the stock Tecnam 
throttle levers and put the data on the CAN bus. Each device also 
has dual encoders to provide greater reliability. 
Western Reserve Controls (WRC) (Akron, Ohio) fiber optic 
bus extenders (FOBEs) are commercial products that are 
customized for X-57 by repackaging for fit and robustness 
requirements. These bus extenders convert the electrical signals 
on the copper CAN bus to optical signals on fiber optic cables 
and convert them back to electrical signals on a copper segment 
closer to remote CAN components. The distance of the CMCs 
from the rest of the CAN bus components, and their use of high 
current to run the motors, present a higher risk of EMI in the 
copper CAN bus segments. This risk is mitigated by separating 
the segments with FOBEs and fiber optic cables. Using fiber 
optic cables also reduces the risk of reaching the line-length 
limits of the CAN bus standard and susceptibility radiated EMI 
from the traction power bus. 
A CAN-controlled relay box is a product by Blink Marine 
(Milan, Italy) that allows relays to be opened and closed using 
CAN messages. This provides an audio annunciator capability 
that can provide key alarms to the X-57 pilot. These alarms are 
defined collaboratively with the test pilots, system designers, 
and operations team. The audio annunciator works by grounding 
specific inputs to the device, resulting in output in the form of 
an audio message. CAN messages from the ACL to the relay 
box energize relays which completes the circuit to the 
annunciator, allowing the ACL to determine any alarm states 
and to alert the pilot both audibly (through the audio 
annunciator) and visually (through the D175 display). The audio 
annunciator that uses the relay box is a PRD60 accessory device 
developed by PS Engineering (Lenoir City, Tennessee). The 
device contains six pre-programmed messages and the ability to 
mute messages by acknowledging them with a simple 
push-button. 
The X-57 instrumentation system contains a CAN bus 
monitoring card that will interface to the command system. This 
card is used to only listen to the traffic on the CAN bus and 
record all of that traffic with a time tag. A subset of these 
messages is also transmitted to the ground station. 
C. Risk Mitigation 
The X-57 command bus is considered a mission-critical 
system, but not a safety-critical system. This designation is 
possible because the pilot does not need to rely on the command 
bus for the safe operation of the X-57 flight demonstrator 
aircraft. All of the safety-related information provided by the 
CAN bus is also independently measured and displayed on the 
right-hand instrument panel in the cockpit. The X-57 aircraft is 
also designed with an unpowered reversion mode in which the 
pilot can safely control the aircraft and complete an unpowered, 
higher speed landing. This capability is facilitated by limiting 
flight to the area over Rogers dry lakebed (Edwards, California), 
which provides ample landing options. 
Although the command system itself is not safety-critical, 
the CMC and BMS, which are safety-critical components, do 
interface with the command bus. A command bus failure for the 
X-57 flight demonstrator aircraft could result in a loss of 
communication to and from the BMSs or CMCs. Therefore, the 
BMS and CMC are designed to behave in a safe manner in case 
of this failure. The BMS operates independently and only 
reports health and status to the command bus. It also reports 
operational status directly to the independent annunciator panel 
in the cockpit. The CMC, however, relies on command inputs 
from the command bus, so the CMC includes safety features to 
allow safe operation of the X-57 aircraft in spite of command 
bus interruption. If command is lost from the throttle encoders, 
an internal CMC counter will increment. During an initial count 
up period, the last verified torque command is held and executed 
by the CMC. After a preset time, the CMC will execute a gradual 
ramp-down of the commanded torque to idle. These features 
enable continued operation for a short time after command bus 
failure, whereas the preset timeout prevents an indefinite 
running of the motors in the case of ground-testing when the 
aircraft is being operated remotely. As a mission-critical system, 
additional measures are taken to reduce the risk of various 
command bus failures, as detailed below.  
While the CAN standard makes the command bus resistant 
to EMI, steps are taken to further reduce the risk of the high-
power systems introducing electric noise into the command bus. 
Mod II to the X-57 aircraft will locate the CMC and motors in 
the same location as the original Tecnam engines. Mod III to the 
X-57 aircraft, however, will require the command bus to extend 
to that point. As such, the FOBEs are used to incorporate the 
fiber optic cable segment between the fuselage and the CMC for 
both Mod II and Mod III. These FOBEs operate in such a way 
that they are invisible to the devices on the CAN Bus. The 
devices on either end of the fiber optic link behave no differently 
than if they were all connected by way of a copper bus. 

To reduce the risk of throttle command failure, the Baumer 
throttle encoders used to measure the angle of the Tecnam 
throttle levers contain a redundant encoder. The component 
transmits the measurement from each encoder onto the CAN 
bus. The components that read this information can then act on 
any discrepancies between the data reported by each encoder. A 
discrepancy between the two encoders is a case wherein which 
the CMC will consider the incoming command as invalid and 
revert to the command bus failure mode, as described above. 
Further risk mitigation for the throttle encoders involves the 
physical component. The initial design to digitize the throttle 
position used a cable-pull encoder. This method was revised to 
use a rotary encoder that has a direct mechanical connection to 
the throttle levers to reduce the chance of the cable snagging. 
The physical layer of the command bus also contains 
redundancy for the motor commands. The data from each 
throttle encoder component go to two CMCs on each side of the 
aircraft. To prevent a complete failure on one side in the case of 
a physical break of the command bus, the physical tie-in of each 
CMC connected to the same motor is located on opposite ends 
of the command bus. Therefore, a break on one side of the 
command bus ensures a physical path from the throttle encoders 
to at least one CMC on each side as indicated in Fig. 9. 
VII. FAILURE ANALYSIS 
The redundancy architecture described above minimizes the 
scope of single-mode faults, and the component testing will 
reduce the likelihood of faults occurring during the flight phases 
of the SCEPTOR project. These assumptions must be analyzed 
formally to ensure no faults with severe consequences are likely 
to occur at critical moments. A Failure Modes and Effects 
Analysis (FMEA) identifies the repercussions of each relevant 
failure. When coupled with overarching hazard tracking and 
emergency procedure development and testing in a full cockpit 
simulator with the X-57 test pilots, this approach greatly reduces 
the exposure to catastrophic failures. 
The X-57 FMEA was limited to single-point failure modes 
of the power and communication systems and identifies 
procedural mitigations and failure classifications. The analysis 
focused on top-level components and linkages and will identify 
unique failure case for each component. Some components have 
multiple sub-component-level failures, but their effect on that 
component and the rest of the system is the same; therefore, only 
unique failure cases are considered. The analysis began by 
constructing a full power and communication architecture 
schematic, shown in Fig. 10. 
The diagram depicts the X-57 airplane in the fully integrated 
Mod IV configuration, with the 12 in-board high-lift electric 
motor/propeller propulsors. The Mod II and Mod III versions of 
the diagram would omit the 12 inboard propulsors, as those are 
introduced as part of the Mod IV development. There is very 
little difference to the power and communication architecture 
between the Mod II and Mod III airplanes. A selection of the 
nearly four dozen X-57 Mod II and Mod III failures identified 
in the FMEA process are described in Table II. Mod IV failures 
also include all permutations for any specific inboard motor or 
groups of inboard motors, but are not discussed in this paper. 
There were two primary failure situations that the team 
identified as critically important for mitigation: asymmetric 
thrust condition for the Mod III configuration, and an in-flight 
battery fire. These two failures represent conditions that may be 
unrecoverable for the pilot. The X-57 system has many design 
and procedural considerations to prevent these conditions, and 
mitigation strategies for these situations are in place. 
The Mod III asymmetric thrust scenario is a condition such 
that only one of the wingtip electric motors provides thrust, and 
the resulting moment cannot be trimmed out with the rudder and 
elevators. The stock Tecnam aircraft can trim a one-engine-
inoperable (OEI) condition, and the Mod II aircraft can trim an 
OEI because the locations of the propulsors and location of the 
thrust generation is the same. In Mod III, however, by placing 
the propulsors at the wingtips, the effective moment arm is 
increased beyond the capacity of the rudder to counteract. In this 
Fig. 10. The X-57 command system network diagram. 

situation, it is better to disable both propulsors (operating as an 
unpowered glider) than to operate only one motor. Depending 
on the type and severity of the failure, the pilot may elect to 
remove power from the operational side or de-rate to 50 percent 
(a condition which is still trimmable with the stock rudder). 
The battery fire or thermal event scenario is when one or 
both of the lithium-ion traction batteries are on fire or in thermal 
runaway. This condition is critical, as it not only degrades the 
power available to the motors for thrust, but could burn through 
structural members inside the fuselage. The battery features a 
vent system that segregates any ejecta or noxious gases from the 
pilot. Battery fire mitigation includes fire prevention methods, 
best practices from industry, and design features from the 
lithium battery systems developed by NASA for the 
International Space Station. 
These two failure scenarios provide a starting point for 
identifying component-level failures and their respective 
criticality status (safety-critical, mission-critical, or negligible). 
Table II describes a selection of the identified failures. The 
Failure Scenario Matrix was derived from the NASA Orion 
PA-1 project redundancy analysis. In the nominal case when all 
systems are operating, all systems are green, for “operational”. 
Each row describes a failure and the impacts on related 
components, shown with an F (failed component), D (degraded 
performance) or I (inoperable) to show when a component 
failure impact other components. 
Each failure receives a criticality designation, which is used 
by the test pilot and operations engineers for mitigation and 
recovery strategies. Failures categorized as safety-critical, 
which are a direct result of an asymmetric thrust condition, a 
battery fire or thermal event, or a loss-of-power condition in 
which the airplane effectively becomes an unpowered glider and 
an emergency landing is unavoidable. For instance, the Battery 
Contactor (4x) scenario indicates that both contactors on each 
battery pack (a total of four) have failed in the open position, 
removing all high-voltage power from the batteries to the 
traction bus. The motor controllers and cruise motors therefore 
no longer have traction power and cannot provide thrust to the 
airplane, so they are shown with an I to indicate “inoperable” in 
Table II. Alternatively, in the Gen. bus (DC conv.) A||B scenario, 
one generator bus DC converter can no longer provide 14 VDC 
to the avionics buses, but the remaining one continues to operate 
nominally. No other systems are impacted, so this scenario is 
categorized as N or “negligible”.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The SCEPTOR project is a rapid-execution, build-fly-learn 
experiment opportunity with a comparatively low budget and 
limited schedule. Careful design of the developmental systems 
and thorough analysis of these systems allow for a more agile 
project while still addressing the thesis that propulsion airframe 
integrations enabled by electric propulsion systems can be a net 
benefit to aircraft performance. Many of the X-57 aircraft 
systems are simpler than their commercial counterparts so that 
the research team can focus only on the handful of technologies 
that are being developed. The traction power system, however, 
is one major exception; this system is developmental and 
resources are limited, so careful consideration of the path to 
NASA X-Plane flight qualification is appropriate and necessary. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Dubois, M. van der Geest, J. Bevirt, S. Clarke, R. J. Christie, and N. 
K. Borer, “Design of an electric propulsion system for SCEPTOR’s 
outboard nacelle,” AIAA-2016-3925, 2016.  
[2] N. Borer, M. Patterson, J. Viken, M. Moore, S. Clarke, M. Redifer, et al., 
“Design and performance of NASA SCEPTOR distributed electric 
propulsion flight demonstrator,” AIAA 2016-3920, 2016. 
[3] Wiring Aerospace Vehicle, SAE Aerospace Standard AS50881F, 2015. 
[4] Robert Bosch GmbH, CAN Specification, Version 2.0, Stuttgart, 1991, 
http://www.bosch-semiconductors.de/media/ubk_semiconductors/pdf_1/
canliteratur/can2spec.pdf [cited 27 March 2017]. 
[5] CAN in Automation, “CANopen – The Standardized Embedded 
Network,” 
https://www.can-cia.org/can-knowledge/canopen/canopen. 
[cited 3 April 2017]. 
RECOMMENDED READING 
[6] S. Clarke, and M. Moore, “Convergent Aeronautics Solutions Project – 
SCEPTOR – Scalable Convergent Electric Propulsion Technology and 
Operations Research,” NASA DFRC-E-DAA-TN37115, 2016. 
[7] S. Clarke, “SCEPTOR Power System Design: Experimental Electric 
Propulsion System Design and Qualification for Crewed Flight Testing,” 
NASA DFRC-E-DAA-TN32895, 2016. 
[8] S. Ginn, and S. Clarke, “Spiral Development of Distributed Electric 
Propulsion from Ground to Flight,” NASA DFRC-E-DAA-TN36914, 
2016. 
[9] J. Murray, and J. Lechniak, “The LEAPTech Experiment, Approach, 
Results, Recommendations,” NASA DFRC-E-DAA-TN36158, 2016. 
[10]  K. Papathakis, K. Kloesel, Y. Lin, S. Clarke, J. Ediger, and S. Ginn, 
“Design and development of a 200-kw turbo-electric distributed 
propulsion testbed,” AIAA 2016-4611, 2016. 
[11] R. Jansen, C. Bowman, and A. Jankovsky, “Sizing power components of 
an electrically driven tail cone thruster and range extender,” 
AIAA-2016-3766, 2016. 
TABLE II.  
X-57 MOD II AND MOD III FAILURE SCENARIO MATRIX 
Failure Scenario 
Cruise Motor (1||2) 
Cruise Motor (1&2) 
MC / inverter (1x) 
MC / inverter (2x) 
MC / inverter (4x) 
Pitch controller (s) 
Cruise Contactor (1x) 
Fiber Optic Modems 
Traction bus (A||B) 
Traction bus (A&B) 
Battery (A||B) 
Battery (A&B) 
Generator bus (A||B) 
Wing av. bus (A||B) 
Criticality 
Single cruise motor 
F
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S
Single motor controller 
D
 F  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 M
Quad motor controller 
 
I
 
 F  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S
Prop Pitch feather (1x) 
I
 
 
 
 F  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S
Cruise contactor (1x) 
D
 D  
 
 F  
 
 
 
 
 
 M
Fiber Optic Modem 
D
 
I 
 
 
 
 F  
 
 
 
 
 M
Traction bus A||B (L||R) 
D
 D  
 
 
 
 F
 
 
 
 
 M
Traction bus A&B (L&R)
 
I
 
 
I 
 
 
 
 F
 
 
 
 S
Battery A||B (therm. evt.) 
 D
 D  
 
 
 
I
 F
 
I
 S
Batt A&B (therm. evt.) 
 
I
 
 D  
 
 
 
I
 F
 
 S
BMS (L||R)  
 D
 
 
I 
 
 
I 
 
 F
 
 
 S
BMS (L&R) 
 D
 
 
I 
 
 
I 
 
 
 F
 
 S
Battery contactor (1x) 
 D
 
I 
 
 
 
 D
 F
 
 
 M
Battery contactor (4x) 
 
I
 
 
I 
 
 
 
 D
 F
 
 S
Gen. bus (DC conv.) A||B
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 F
 N
Wing av. bus A||B (L||R) D
 
I 
 
 
 
 
I 
 
 
 
 
 F M
Wing av. bus A||B (L&R)
 D
 
I 
 
 
 
I 
 
 
 
 
 F M
 
Operational 
D Degraded performance 
I Inoperable 
F Component failure 
 
S Land as soon as possible M Land as soon as practical N Assess after flight 
 
 


===== TECHNICAL REFERENCE: NASA_X-57_SCEPTOR_Thermal_Analysis.pdf =====

Steady State Thermal Analyses of SCEPTOR X-57
Wingtip Propulsion
Sydney L. Schnulo,∗Jeﬀrey C. Chin,† and Andrew D. Smith‡
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135, U.S.A.
Arthur Dubois§
Joby Aviation, Santa Cruz, CA, 95060, U.S.A.
Electric aircraft concepts enable advanced propulsion airframe integration approaches
that promise increased eﬃciency as well as reduced emissions and noise. NASA’s fully elec-
tric Maxwell X-57, developed under the SCEPTOR program, features distributed propul-
sion across a high aspect ratio wing. There are 14 propulsors in all: 12 high lift motor that
are only active during take oﬀand climb, and 2 larger motors positioned on the wingtips
that operate over the entire mission. The power electronics involved in the wingtip propul-
sion are temperature sensitive and therefore require thermal management. This work fo-
cuses on the high and low ﬁdelity heat transfer analysis methods performed to ensure that
the wingtip motor inverters do not reach their temperature limits. It also explores diﬀer-
ent geometry conﬁgurations involved in the X-57 development and any thermal concerns.
All analyses presented are performed at steady state under stressful operating conditions,
therefore predicting temperatures which are considered the worst-case scenario to remain
conservative.
Nomenclature
A
Area, m2
AR
Aspect Ratio
Cf
Flow Coeﬃcient
Dh
Hydraulic Diameter, m
δ
Boundary Layer Thickness, m
H
Heat Sink Channel Height, m
h
Convective Heat Transfer Coeﬃcient, W/m2K
k
Thermal Conductivity, W/mK
L
Length, m
N
Number of Fins
Nu
Nusselt Number
ν
Kinematic Viscosity of Air, m2/s
P
Power, kW
Pr
Prandtl Number
˙Q
Heat Transfer Rate, W
q
Dynamic Pressure, Pa
Re
Reynolds Number
ρ
Density, kg/m3
T
Temperature, ◦C
U
Flow Velocity, m/s
V
Velocity, m/s
W
Heat Sink Channel Width, m
I.
Introduction
In electric aircraft, temperature limits are not only a major concern in component design, but the
dissipation of heat is spread across the aircraft. Batteries, power buses, motors, and inverters all carry
a thermal load.1 A major challenge in using power electronics for aircraft propulsion is maintaining safe
operating temperatures without adding excess weight and drag associated with many thermal management
∗Aerospace Engineer, Propulsion Systems Analysis Branch, sydney.l.schnulo@nasa.gov, and AIAA Member.
†Aerospace Engineer, Propulsion Systems Analysis Branch, jeﬀrey.c.chin@nasa.gov, and AIAA Member.
‡Aerospace Engineer, Vantage Partners, andrew.d.smith-1@nasa.gov, and AIAA Member.
§Aeronautical Engineer, Joby Aviation, arthur.dubois@jobyaviation.com, AIAA Member.
1 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

methods, such as implementation of an active cooling loop or external heat sinks.
Traditional internal
combustion engines may produce much more heat than electric components, but this waste heat is expelled
through the exhaust. Many unique power electronic cooling architectures have been explored to minimize the
negative impact of adding means of cooling.2 The cooling method explored in this paper involves allowing
ﬂow to pass through the X-57 wingtip nacelle of the cruise propulsion system to passively cool the motor
and inverters in series.
A.
Background
NASA is collaborating with multiple industry partners through the Scalable Convergent Electric Propulsion
Technology Operations Research (SCEPTOR) program to develop a new generation of aircraft which leverage
propulsion airframe integration and boundary layer interaction to improve the overall energy consumption
and aircraft weight over conventional internal combustion engines. The research testbed, shown in ﬁgure 1,
has become the ﬁrst aircraft in 10 years to be given a NASA X-plane designation: the Maxwell X-57. The
Figure 1: NASA’s Scalable Convergent Electric Propulsion Technology Operations Research (SCEPTOR)
ﬁnal fully electric X-57 aircraft concept with distributed propulsion.
project succeeds and is informed by previous NASA distributed electric propulsion (DEP) research endeavors
including HEIST and LEAPTECH.3 The plane is being developed in progressively complex modiﬁcations,
or mods. Mod I is the baseline: a stock Tecnam P2006T. The ﬁnal design, Mod IV, is the Tecnam plane
outﬁtted with a high aspect ratio wing and batteries in the fuselage. Six small high lift motors span the
leading edge of each high aspect ratio wing to enable a 2.5 times reduction in wing area and are ultimately
intended to provide a 4.8 times reduction in energy at cruise over the original Tecnam P2006T aircraft.4
The high lift motors are only active during takeoﬀand climb; during other segments of the mission, their
propellers collapse aerodynamically against their nacelles to reduce drag.
B.
Wingtip Propulsor Cooling Architecture
Primary propulsion power is derived from two larger cruise propulsors mounted to the aircraft wingtips. The
nacelle ingests air which cools the outrunner permanent magnet motors through a radial heat sink placed on
the inner radius of the stator.5 Arthur Dubois and Robert Christie completed the motor heat sink design in
previous work.2 The geometry of the nacelle ﬂow path is shown in ﬁgure 2.
2 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 2: Free stream air ﬂows through the wingtip nacelle, ﬁrst through the motor, then it is ducted
through the heat sink where it leaves the nacelle through the exhaust hole. It is important to note that there
is another duct and inverter ﬁlling the other half of the nacelle.
The ﬂow exhausted from the motor is then directed through the ﬁnned heat sink that is installed on the
motor inverter chip. Flow exits through the exhaust hole. There are two inverters for each cruise motor, so
the second inverter/heat sink/duct conﬁguration is mirrored over the horizontal center line of ﬁgure 2. This
discussion details the methods used to ensure adequate cooling to the inverters, as well as considerations for
the second modiﬁcation of the design.
II.
Inverter Heat Sink Optimization and Analysis
Each six phase cruise motor is driven by a pair of custom 3-phase inverters developed by Joby Aviation.
The inverters are located mid-nacelle, and have no dedicated supply of cooling air. Because of their relatively
high heat tolerance, the inverter ﬁn row may be cooled by exhaust air from the motor heat sink annulus.
Nacelle conﬁgurations with dedicated cooling inlets were explored, but rejected.5 The most stressful inverter
thermal conditions occur during the climb phase of ﬂight. Each inverter must dissipate no less than 1KW
without exceeding a temperature of 150◦C, while using air that has already been heated by the motor as
a cooling ﬂuid. To take full advantage of the temperature gradient between the motor exhaust and the
inverter, the inverter is outﬁtted with a traditional parallel plate heat sink, shown in ﬁgure 3.
Figure 3: Maxwell X-57 wingtip motor inverter heat sink design.
The most challenging aspect of designing the inverter heat sink is the need to balance a high heat exchange
density with low ﬂow resistance. Any signiﬁcant ﬂow restrictions through the inverter have a cascading eﬀect
resulting in lower ﬂow rates, and thus higher exhaust temperatures from the motor. This makes it more
likely that both the motor and inverter assemblies will overheat. Through the design this was taken into
account, and the ﬁnal ﬂow ﬁeld with the ﬂow restrictions of the heat sinks is shown in ﬁgure 2.
3 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

A.
Fin Row Analysis
The X57 cruise motor controller is cooled by a row of aluminum ﬁns immersed in air that has been pre-heated
by the cruise motor. The decision to cascade air from the motor to controllers reduces the induced drag
from the cruise nacelle cooling. Unfortunately, it also complicates thermal performance studies of the cruise
controllers. A channel ﬂow model was used to estimate controller heat sink performance. Ground testing by
Joby Aviation has already established an upper limit for available cooling air rates and temperature from
the X57 motor. Table 1 gives the heat sink channel dimensions.
Table 1: Inverter heat sink channel dimensions.
Channel Width (m)
0.002
Channel Height (m)
0.043
Channel Length (m)
0.135
Fin Thickness (m)
0.002
Number of Channels
59
Number of Fins
60
A simple continuity check yields an upper limit for the channel Reynolds number, where the greatest
expected ﬂow rate through the controller heat sink is equal to half of the ﬂow through the motor, as there
are two inverters per motor:
Uchannel =
Umotor
2 ∗Nchan ∗Achan
(1)
Reynolds number can then be established using average channel velocity and dimensions. Having es-
tablished a ﬂow rate and regime for the controller heat sink, a steady state operating temperature can be
resolved from an internal heat transfer correlation with the given inlet conditions.
˙Qconvection = h ∗Achannel ∗(Tchannel −Tmotorexhaust)
(2)
To ﬁnd the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient, Nusselt number is calculated.6
h = Nu ∗k
Dh
(3)
Nu = 8.325 ∗(1 −2.042 ∗AR + 3.085 ∗AR2 −2.477 ∗AR3)
(4)
where
AR = Wchannel
Hchannel
(5)
With a total wetted channel area of 0.685 m2, this yields an estimate for the controller convective heat
transfer coeﬃcient of 56 W/m2K. Solving for the isothermal heat sink temperature, Tcontroller:
Tcontroller = Tmotorexhaust + Qcontroller
h ∗Achannel
(6)
yields a controller temperature of 91.3◦C. This is assuming steady state at maximum power, where the
ﬂow coming out of the motor is characterized to be 60◦C. In addition to this low ﬁdelity analysis, high
ﬁdelity thermal analysis performed in StarCCM showed a maximum temperature of 97◦C, resulting in a 6
percent error between the models.
4 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 4: High ﬁdelity steady state analysis done by Joby Aviation in StarCCM yields a max temperature
of 97◦C.
B.
Heat Sink Geometry Design
In the ﬁrst iteration of the heat sink, the ﬁn tips remained a constant height across the length, as the bottom
of the heat sink created a sunk in contour to conform to the geometry of the inverter chip. The original heat
sink design installed on the inverter is shown in ﬁgure 5
Figure 5: The original heat sink design featured ﬁns that were ﬂat across the top surfaces, while the bottom
curved to stay aligned with the inverter geometry.
The question of how this expanding ﬂow area as air travels through the heat sink geometry would aﬀect
heat transfer prompted a high ﬁdelity analysis.
CFD of a single ﬂow channel, performed in COMSOL
Multiphysics, reveal a recirculation zone where inverter waste heat would not be rejected as eﬀectively. This
analysis can be seen in ﬁgure 6(a).
5 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

(a) Original ﬁn gap design.
(b) Final ﬁn gap design.
Figure 6: CFD of the original heat sink (a) single ﬁn row channel shows a recirculation zone (blue) as the
bottom dips to keep in contact with the inverter. When the bottom contour is duplicated at the top of the
heat sink ﬁns, the ﬂow through the heat sink is more even (b).
To mitigate this concern, the contoured ﬁn tips that are presented in ﬁgure 3 are implemented. This
geometry allows even ﬂow through the heat sink (ﬁgure 6(b)) due to ﬁn height and therefore ﬂow area
remaining constant, ensuring optimal heat transfer.
III.
Directing the Flow from the Motor Exhaust to the Heat Sinks
In order to maximize the ﬂow rate through the inverter heat sink, the ﬂow out of the available motor
annulus area is ducted and forced through the two heat sinks on either side of the motor. If the ducting is
not present, then ﬂow will be inclined to avoid the resistance that the heat sink introduces. Due to necessary
structural bulkheads aft of the motor and on the inboard side of the cruise nacelle, a ﬂow obstruction was
unavoidable. The duct geometry and expected ﬂow ﬁeld are shown in ﬁgure 7 Multiple duct designs were
studied to mitigate ﬂow losses and asymmetry at the front face of the heat sink.
Figure 7: Inverter inlet duct in context (left), COMSOL result with ﬂow obstruction (middle), duct solid
geometry with structural cutout (right)
To minimize ﬂow recirculation past the structural cutout, two designs were compared against a baseline
duct without any structural interference (ﬁgure 8). The ﬁrst design contained a discrete cutout, while the
alternate design creates a gradual ramping path with the intention of reducing recirculation behind the
cutout. It was found that the ramp did not improve ﬂow, and actually reduced the edge speed further.
6 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 8: COMSOL studies (bottom) of diﬀerent geometries (top) with respect to structural constraints.
As a second study, ﬂow vanes were explored to redirect air displaced by the bulkhead cutouts, again
with the intention to minimize the ﬂow velocity mismatch at the face of the heat sink. Various baﬄing
conﬁgurations were explored, varying the number, size and angle of the vanes to partially redirect the ﬂow
from fast regions to slower regions blocked by structural members. Each new design was analyzed in a coarse
meshed COMSOL CFD to rapidly characterize each conﬁguration, as shown in ﬁgure 9.
Figure 9: Flow-evening COMSOL studies with added turning vanes in the ducts.
It was concluded that fairly even ﬂow could be attained with a single turning vane in the center of the
duct. Looking into the ﬂow, displaced ﬂow is redirected back toward the right edge of the duct, while the
high speed air on the left side of the vane is expanded to reduce speed. Regardless of the blockage, the
ﬂow gradient is primarily due to the left side of the duct drawing in air from a larger segment of the motor
annulus circumference.
7 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

IV.
Conduction Analysis to Structure
Beyond the thermal analysis of the motor and inverter system, calculations were performed to ensure
heat spread to the nacelle composites did not surpass the thermal limits of the resins. Heat is transferred to
the composite structure through two mechanisms: conduction through the mounting structure, or convection
through the internal airﬂow path. Both scenarios are found to be within composite resin temperature limits
of 74◦C for the worst-case steady-state scenario condition of maximum power during takeoﬀ. Structural
temperatures would be even lower if the analyses were repeated based on transient conditions, since structures
would slowly approach the air temperature, and the exposure to the hot air would only be momentary until
the plane climbs into cooler air.
Steady state CFD was performed in StarCCM to ﬁrst examine the convection heat scenario. Results show
internal air temperatures reaching a maximum of 70◦C at the motor structural bulkhead and 72◦C from
the inverter heat sink exhaust. This is assuming hot day (49◦C) conditions at Armstrong Flight Research
Center. These temperatures serve as an upper bound for the composite temperature. This analysis provides
extra conservatisms by not factoring in the heat capacity of the composites, and heat spreading though the
skin that would occur. The uneven temperature proﬁle can be attributed to the asymmetry between the
inboard and outboard geometry, the nacelle mounting structure reduces airﬂow causing acceptable hot spots.
The design provides opportunity for even greater temperature margin by further conﬁning the air within
additional ducting at the bulkhead and aft of the inverter. This would restrict the warmest air from ever
(even momentarily) impinging on the composites.
A second set of analyses were performed by GRC to model the heat conducted from the motor stator
coils, inwards through the internal mounting structure, then back outwards towards the composite nacelle
structure. This heat path was shown to be insigniﬁcant. The long narrow path does not lend itself to eﬃcient
conduction, and the temperature drop in the bulkhead alone is suﬃcient to show the temperature drop across
the entire system to be much lower than temperatures seen through the convective mechanism examined
above. Figure 10 shows a COMSOL FEA analysis showing conduction from an overly conservative internal
temperature to a negligible outer temperature that will be in direct contact with the composite structure.
Figure 10: The purple motor structure (Left) does not directly touch the nacelle. Conduction requires heat
to travel from the outer perimeter, inward to the middle, through fasteners, and back outwards through
the bulkhead. (Right) Heat conduction from the motor to the bulkhead to the outer composite structure.
Assumes 15W/m2-K convection across bulkhead and 150W/m2-K outside edge convection coeﬃcient.
V.
Modiﬁcation II Geometry Discussion
The SCEPTOR technologies are being demonstrated in a series of modiﬁcations, or Mods. In Mod I,
the original Tecnam 2006T aircraft was instrumented and ﬂown as a baseline. This is the only fuel burning
Mod. Mod II will have the original Tecnam airframe with the Rotax 912S3 piston engines replaced by Joby
cruise motors and inverters. The motors will be driven by batteries in the fuselage. In Mod III, the high
aspect ratio wing will be added, equipped with high lift nacelles. The cruise motors will operate from the
wing tips. Finally, Mod IV will operate as described in previous sections. It is important to understand
8 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

the diﬀerence between the Mod II and Mod IV cruise nacelles for the purpose of this work, as the subtle
geometry diﬀerences have an eﬀect on the heat transfer occurring in both the motor and the inverter.
A.
Mod II Baﬄing Study
In the second modiﬁcation (Mod II) of the X-57 vehicle, the Tecnam P2006T piston engines are replaced
with the cruise motors. Mod II serves as the electric Tecnam baseline and allows for the validation of electric
motors, batteries, and instrumentation to inform the later modiﬁcations. For the implementation of this
conﬁguration, cowling is placed around the motor, as shown in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: Cruise motor with Mod II cowling.
The motor is surrounded by cowling which allows a 3/8 inch gap for ﬂow over the motor on the top
half and a rapid increase in area on the bottom half. This is cause for concern as it was found that 14
percent of the motor cooling occurs radially through the nacelle skin to the environment with a convective
heat transfer coeﬃcient of 120 W/m2K in the Mod IV conﬁguration where the motor is directly exposed
to the ambient air.5 To evaluate this concern, low ﬁdelity calculations yield the thermal boundary layer
thickness over the length of the motor as well as the eﬀective convective heat transfer coeﬃcient on both
the top and bottom motor surfaces. If the boundary layers do not interact and the heat transfer coeﬃcient
is comparable to the Mod IV value, the motor will still be able to dissipate 14 percent of its heat through
the motor skin. Because ﬂow is turbulent, the thickness of the thermal boundary layer is comparable to the
velocity boundary layer thickness.6 The velocity and thermal boundary layer thickness over the motor ﬂow
are found using equations 7 and 8 respectively.
δ
Lmotor
= 0.382 ∗(
ν
U ∗Lmotor
)1/5
(7)
δt = δ ∗Pr−0.33
(8)
As the ﬂow moves across the motor surface, it is important that the boundary layer thickness does not
grow to half of the gap thickness. If it does grow to larger than half of the gap thickness, then the boundary
layer will begin to interact with the boundary layer that exists on the inner lip of the cowling. This interaction
will hinder heat transfer with respect to the Mod IV conﬁguration where the motor is exposed to free air.
Figure 12 shows the results of the analysis along the length of the motor.
9 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 12: Thermal boundary layer low ﬁdelity analysis results.
The gap center line shown is the mid line of the 3/8 inch gap. It is apparent that the boundary layers
will not begin to interact along the length of the motor, so the convective heat transfer will occur at the
same rate as when the motor is exposed to free stream air. To verify this, the convective heat transfer
coeﬃcient across the motor is calculated. Analysis of the free stream motor case showed an average heat
transfer coeﬃcient of 120 W/m2K.5 Equation 9 provides the heat transfer coeﬃcient over the length of the
motor.
h = Nu ∗kair
Lmotor
(9)
In order to calculate the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient, Nusselt number must be evaluated. Nusselt
number is found using equation 10.6
Nu = 0.296 ∗Re ∗Pr1/3
(10)
The average heat transfer coeﬃcient along the length of the motor is found to be roughly 133 W/m2K
which corroborates the boundary layer thickness conclusion that heat transfer will take place with the cowling
in the same manner as the free stream scenario. The heat transfer coeﬃcient across the length of the motor
is seen in ﬁgure 13(a).
(a) Constant 3/8” gap.
(b) Expanding gap.
Figure 13: Convective heat transfer coeﬃcient across the motor length where there is a constant 3/8” gap
between the baﬄing and the motor skin (a) and where the gap height is expanding across the motor length
(b) is 133 W/m2K and 45 W/m2K respectively.
10 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

It is important to note that the results shown in ﬁgure 13(a) assumed a constant 3/8 inch gap, and
therefore steady velocity, over the motor. This is the case for the top surface of the motor. In the bottom
surface however, the area of the gap expands considerably along the length of the motor. This causes the
ﬂow to decelerate. Taking this deceleration into consideration, the average heat transfer coeﬃcient decreases
signiﬁcantly, to about 45 W/m2K (ﬁgure 13(b)). This implies that the bottom of the motor will not receive
as much cooling as the top. To ensure that this is not the case, it was recommended that baﬄing be added
to the lower motor to ensure a consistent 3/8” annular gap around the entirety of the motor.
B.
Mod II Cooling Analysis Script with Oﬀ-Nominal Cases
Mod II not only includes outer baﬄing, but the ducts and inverters are placed in a slightly diﬀerent conﬁg-
uration in which the inverters are seated side-by-side rather than back-to-back, ﬁgure 14, in order to ﬁt into
the original Tecnam wing.
Figure 14: Internal ducting for Mod II inverter cooling
A python script was developed to support thermal analysis of the Mod II conﬁguration and ﬂight condition
matrix. The steady state thermo-hydraulic model consists of a network of zero dimensional ﬂuid nodes
connected by ﬂow-resisting elements. For the Mod II study, only major heat sources, heat sinks, and ﬂow
resistors were modeled, as shown in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Resistor visualization of the heat transfer circuit modeled in python.
While the X-57 Mod II example is simpliﬁed (merging parallel ﬂow paths through each inverter), the
script can accommodate ﬂow networks of arbitrary conﬁguration so long as solutions for overall and branch
ﬂow resistances are included. The input parameters as well as sample inputs are given in table 2.
11 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Table 2: Sample Inputs: X-57 Mod II Flight Condition.
Inlet Dynamic Pressure, (Pa)
1171
Density at Altitude (kg/m3)
1.055
Cruise Power (kW per Motor)
72.1
Inlet Temperature (◦C)
35
Motor Dissipated Heat (kW)
3.605
Controller Dissipated Heat (kW)
2.884
Thermal characterization of the Mod II nacelle ﬂow path assumes a constant convective heat transfer
coeﬃcient, constant convective surface area, and a range of inlet dynamic pressure that result in cooling
channel ﬂow rates consistent with the internal convection model. For the purposes of the script, ﬂow is
idealized (incompressible), as the maximum inlet dynamic pressure for any tested case rarely exceeds 1500
Pa.7 Additionally, viscous eﬀects in each component are captured by their respective ﬂow coeﬃcients, where
the total ﬂow rate though the resistor network is:
U = q(Cfmotor + Cfcontroller)
(11)
The generalized ﬂow coeﬃcients are derived from the pressure response of the Darcy Weisbach correlation
for fully developed ﬂow7 and are assumed to be constant for all inlet dynamic pressures. Entrance and exit
region eﬀects were not modeled in either component, as the rectangular cooling channels in both the motor
and controller heat sinks have a suﬃciently long aspect ratio (Dh/L greater than 100). If node pressures
are desired, residual dynamic pressures can be found by applying continuity to individual resistive elements.
With steady state ﬂow resolved the motor, controller, and plenum (or node) temperatures can be solved
be applying the convective heat transfer expression and enthalpy balance across each element. The total
convective heat transfer coeﬃcient, h, captures the wetted surface area inside the cooling channels in addition
to the explicitly computed convective heat transfer coeﬃcient per the Dittus-Boelter6 correlation in which
h = Nu ∗k
Dh
(12)
and
Nu = 0.023 ∗Re4/5 ∗Pr2/5
(13)
Because of the narrow range of tested ﬂight conditions, an average convective heat transfer coeﬃcient is
computed for each component; in eﬀect, creating a linearized hydraulic model. Because the accuracy of the
thermal performance script depends on good characterization of the major hydraulic resistive elements in
the cruise nacelle (as well as convective heat sources and sinks) veriﬁed test data is critical to estimating real-
world thermal performance of the Mod II cruise assembly. Without such characterization, it is diﬃcult to
compare thermal performance between the various X-57 conﬁgurations. However, even without high ﬁdelity
results, the steady state thermal performance script can be useful when comparing diﬀerent ﬂight conditions
for one conﬁguration. Applied to three cruise states of the X-57 mod II (slightly varying air speed, power
and altitude), the script resolves each condition’s relative thermal performance, as shown in ﬁgure 16. Test
ID 3 corresponds to the max takeoﬀpower just after liftoﬀ. Test ID 11 and 13 correspond to maximum
climb rates, using the highest motor power and a more typical motor power, respectively.
12 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 16: Mod II python test script outputs (top) and inputs (bottom)
Coupling between the controller and motor states is apparent when comparing test IDs 3 and 11: for only
a 15 knot increase in air speed, the motor temperature drops 12.5◦C, while the controller falls nearly 30◦C.
The decreased temperature of the air leaving the motor provides a higher temperature gradient, improving
the eﬀectiveness of the downstream controller heat sink. This python script allows the user to run many
diﬀerent ﬂight conditions in small amounts of time to predict thermal performance.
VI.
Conclusion
Future work will rely on test data to better characterize the ﬂow characteristics through the nacelle to
improve overall model ﬁdelity, especially of the Mod II script. Many of the ﬂow correlations and coeﬃcients
are assumed based on CFD analysis and need to be veriﬁed through testing to fully validate model accu-
racy. Additionally, as the design of the wingtip progresses, other thermal concerns may occur to warrant
further thermal calculations. One example is that instrumentation and controls will be placed aft of the
inverter. Thermal considerations will play a role in both protecting the equipment from operating above its
temperature limit and ensuring that it is positioned in a way to allow adequate ﬂow through the system.
By performing steady state analysis of the methods used to cool the power electronics of the wingtip
propulsor, it has been ensured that the components will not reach their temperature limit in the SCEPTOR
X-57 ﬂight proﬁle. For the most part, steady state analysis was performed at the highest power operating
point. The steady state temperatures reached were below the temperature limit of the motor and inverter.
This is conservative because in reality, the components will not be running at these high power draws long
enough to reach steady state. The results of the thermal analyses presented indicate safe performance of the
SCEPTOR Maxwell X-57 Aircraft.
13 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all involved in the X-57 Performance and Sizing IPT, as well as the
Power and Controls IPT for their input and guidance on the thermal design of the wingtip nacelles and
related subsystems. External contributions from ESAero and Joby Aviation were also invaluable.
References
1Chin, J., Schnulo, S., and Smith, A., “Transient Thermal Analyses of Passive Systems on SCEPTOR X-57,” June 2017.
2Dubois, A., van der Geest, M., Bevirt, J., Christie, R., Borer, N. K., and Clarke, S. C., “Design of an Electric Propulsion
System for SCEPTOR’s Outboard Nacelle,” 16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, AIAA
Aviation, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, jun 2016.
3Papathakis, Kurt, K. K. L. Y. C. S. and Ginn, S., “Design and Development of a 200-kW Turbo-electric Distributed
Propulsion Testbed,” June 2016.
4Borer, N. K., Patterson, M. D., Viken, J. K., Moore, M. D., Bevirt, J., Stoll, A. M., and Gibson, A. R., “Design and
Performance of the NASA SCEPTOR Distributed Electric Propulsion Flight Demonstrator,” 16th AIAA Aviation Technology,
Integration, and Operations Conference, AIAA Aviation, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, jun 2016.
5Christie, Robert, D. A. and Derlaga, J., “Design of an Electric Propulsion System for SCEPTOR,” 16th AIAA Aviation
Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, AIAA Aviation, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, jun
2016.
6Incropera, F. and DeWitt, D., Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer, J. Wiley, 2002.
7White, F. M., Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1979.
14 of 14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
